Thomas, I've been looking forward to interviewing you for such a long time. I mean, it's an
absolute honor and privilege, first of all. And I think the best way to start a podcast with you
would be to just go straight into the deep end. Let's start with two definitions. And maybe we
can differentiate between these two concepts, talk about the similarities. But let's define
what consciousness is to you and what the self is. Right. So consciousness is a folk
psychological umbrella term. Nobody knows what it means. You can always tell when neuroscientists
start their papers and they want to make some bold claims and they don't know what to say in
the opening paragraph. They always mumble something about what it is like and Tom Nagel.
And nobody knows what that actually means, what it is like, what that is,
what is to be explained there. A lot of people like to talk about qualia and 95% of them wouldn't
be able to say what that is, where it comes from. I think qualia don't exist. So one part,
as you know, I've been in that consciousness community for three, four decades of my academic
life. I'm one of the people who founded the association for the scientific study of consciousness.
And there's a persisting problem. There are naturalist philosophers like myself
who think that naturalism is not an ideology, but a research program. And that research program
consists in reformulating classical philosophical questions about consciousness in a way so that
they become tractable for the empirical sciences. So there's a continuity. It's not an ideology
because naturalist philosophers would be completely open if exactly empirical research
shows there is something that cannot be explained. So if you're an anti-reductionist, if you believe
there is something that is mysterious about consciousness and unexplainable in principle,
then you will have to become a naturalist because it's your goal to describe that
or can't be explained as precisely as possible. And you want to make progress. You want to
describe that, what is unexplainable, more precisely than it has ever been described
in the history before. So if you're an anti-reductionist, you have to become a
neuro-computational modeler, a neuroscientist, and you have to follow the naturalist program.
The persisting problem is we don't know what the explanation is. If you think about it
more carefully, nobody can really say what it is that needs to be explained. Here's an example
from our own life. So like 24 years ago, I spent a wonderful year at UC San Diego with the Church
Learns. And on a few occasions, I went to lunch in the faculty club with Francis Crick,
one of the most famous Nobel laureates we ever had. And he wanted to crack the problem of
consciousness after having cracked a problem of life. And I still remember one conversation
which got out of hand where I basically said, yes, but Francis, what is it that you want to
explain? And then he said, in the forthcoming book, I've described that conversation. You know,
you philosophers, you've had more than 2000 years time. I'll tell you what, if you want to make a
contribution, the best thing would be you just shut up. We're going to kill this thing in neuroscience
in the next two decades. And I said, yeah, that's great. I'm all for it. I'm a naturalist,
founded the Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness. What is it that you're trying to
explain? Then he mumbled something about that for strategic reasons. In the early phases of a
research program, it's not advisable to have two narrow definitions of your explanandum. I said,
yeah, of course, I understand you don't want to have overfitting philosophical models of
consciousness and all that nonsense. But it just, tell me, what is it that you want to explain?
And then he got really angry at me. You have this to this very day, whole people, whole groups of
neuroscientists have made a career in the neuroscience of consciousness. And there has been great
programs. But nobody can say what exactly it is they're trying to explain. And so that's,
we have an ill-defined folk psychological term consciousness, which has a long history.
For instance, it has a Latin history over centuries, conscientia. It has Greek precursors,
zenedesis. There are a lot of connotations in different cultures and contexts, and it's
not quite clear what we mean. So there's a job for philosophers in this research community,
still laying conceptual foundations. Now you asked about the self? That was your second question?
No such thing. You know me. I just had, you have to cut this out.
I got two messengers telling me I have a recording with you in 10 minutes.
Let me just. I was wondering what that sound was actually. I thought it was a frog.
Everything now. Okay. So what's the self? You don't have one. You couldn't have one.
The most naive way of approaching it is that people talk about their self. But this couldn't
be the case, because then it would be something that you own. You have an ownership relationship
to that self. This couldn't be the case. And that already shows how confused things get.
If there is a self in a certain way, you are it, there must be an identity. And I'm all okay
with people saying, for instance, okay, then let's call what you call the phenomenal self model
in the brain, the self in future, in the future. And if you want to change our rules for speaking
about the self in that way, in a scientifically grounded way, you can do this. But then it means
that is something that is highly intermittent, that is super unstable during REM sleep,
dreaming phases, that doesn't exist during non REM sleep. It is something that has multiple layers,
is highly incoherent over time. And most of all, not something that, as German philosophers would
say, hold itself in existence by itself. I think the proper English term would be ontological
self subsistence. So selves are not elementary building blocks, I think, of the universe,
or substances in the classical metaphysical sense of a substance, or some intrinsic essence or something.
They are high level phenomena. If you want to treat whole biological organisms as selves,
then they are pretty impermanent high level phenomena. If you want to just speak of the
experience of self consciousness, which as I think locally supervenes on brain properties,
at one and the same moment, then it is an even more abstract high level features some
computational property of a biological nervous system. If we want to talk like that, that's
fine with me. But that's of course, never what we meant by self. Yeah, when I read ego tunnel and
being no one, I remember just thinking that this is pretty much where my work was aligning to. At
that point, I remember thinking this is perfect for my dissertation. I remember thinking there's
so many chunks, I could possibly quote out of this out of these books. And I did, I remember
referencing you and taking a lot of your work in, I mean, you specifically you delved right into the
psychiatric phenomenon, and you spoke about every aspect of consciousness, the unity,
transparency, self-perspectivalness, temporality, first person and third person experience.
When you think about these concepts and how philosophers have debated this over time,
the story of the mind body problem. What would your story, if you had to tell someone the story
of the mind body problem, what story would you tell people? The reason why I'm asking this Thomas
is because I find that it's interesting to see how somebody has come to understand this problem
over the years, and how it evolved their own view of what consciousness is today.
Well, first of all, I think, and that is something that is
frequently overlooked, is that there is a pre-theoretical mind body problem,
and a pre-philosophical mind body problem in which all of us can feel, which people have
held over the centuries in different cultures. Usually one would say the modern history of
the mind body debate starts 350 years ago with Descartes and substance dualism,
but of course there are deep historical roots also in other cultures. But what makes Descartes'
view so very appealing to beings like us is actually, I think, a feature of our naturally
evolved self-model in the brain. And I'll tell you an anecdote to illustrate this,
the history of the mind body problem in my own life. I thought in about the fifth semester,
I thought philosophy was absurd. I thought these professors should be different than professors
of chemistry, so they should be wise and impressive. And I found them very narcissistic and pretentious
as a young guy, and I thought this was a very absurd academic enterprise. And then I participated
in a seminar where we looked at two lesser-known works by Descartes, The Treatise on Men, Lom,
and The Passions of the Soul. And there was a young lecturer at that time who made me see
something for the first time. So we looked very carefully at the passages where Descartes says,
in the pineal gland, that's where the soul interacts with the brain. And then he pointed
something out. He said, if mental entities have no spatial properties, as Descartes says, and only
bodies, corporeal entities, are divisible in space and have spatial properties, then it follows
that there cannot be a place in the brain where the soul interacts with the physical body. That
is a completely wrong question, a wrong research program. Where is the locus of interaction between
mind and matter? It cannot be like this. If one of the two principles only has properties in time,
the mind unfolds in time, but no spatial properties. And that's when I got hope.
That's when I had the feeling as a young man, that is a theoretical problem that is worth of my
attention. Because at the same time, 1977, there was Popper and Eklis, the self and its brain,
and they do exactly the same thing with their theory of three worlds. And they have this
speculative Nobel laureate, John Eklis, the speculative model of the liaison brain.
Today, this would be the minimally sufficient neural correlate of consciousness. And the idea is
that is where it is. Now, if it's really non-spatial, this could be the case. But then I started thinking
about the human self. And I realized that for all of us, there are some parts in my phenomenology,
my robust sense of selfhood, which are spatial, my limb movements, my gut feelings, my visor
spatial perspective, and everything. And other things are really not located in the body image.
My thoughts, emotions are very interesting. Moods are very interesting. I'll just start,
if one takes one's own conscious experience, seriously, I make the following claim, if one
really doesn't talk like one has learned to talk, if you see, say, a top down psychophysical interaction,
I decide to lift my hand and I lift my hand. I can observe something I could call the decision.
And I feel my arm moving. But what I do not observe is the actual causal link.
We talk like this. Yeah, yeah, yeah, I know my decisions, my intentions cause my behavior.
We have grown up in this language game. But is our phenomenology really like this?
Or if somebody pinches my arm and I feel a pain? Is there a phenomenology of upward causation,
really? I think there's a gap. And I have, as you know, a long story to tell that the human
self model evolved because we had to jump from branch to branch and run away from predators.
And in the beginning, it was important to navigate and control a body as a whole to integrate
our sensory perceptions, all spatial things. Then we evolved social properties, language,
abstract representations, which were not really grounded in that body image anymore.
And that is why what I mean by the pre philosophical mind body problem, before we start even to think
about it, we can feel it beings like us beings on another planet with another evolutionary history
might not have that kind of intuitive dissonance, that intuitive mind body problem. But what is
happening? Other beings might not be able to imagine their mind as independently flying away,
floating in somewhere after their body has died. But for us, we have these
philosophers also say modal intuitions, intuitions about what is possible and what is necessary.
And for us, it seems to come necessary that my mental processes could somehow
go on without body perception of any kind of space spatial or sensory perception.
And these, these intuitions are grounded, I say, in our biological evolution in computational
properties in our brain, and they make Cartesian intuitions. There is something that doesn't belong
to that animal machine body. They're so plausible. And if I read Descartes, now, I mean, I don't
believe it. But Descartes still has a strong appeal to me. And that is because it directly
plays to a representational divide in my phenomenal self model. That's would be my terminology to explain
it. If that is true, many philosophical problems might actually have phenomenological anchors,
might actually look like a deep and important problem to beings like us, because they are anchored
in the model of reality that we have evolved on the history of this on the surface of this
planet with these brains. So that's the pre philosophical mind body problem. And then
we have, of course, a century long history, as you know too well. And I think one important
thing to understand the problem of consciousness is not one problem. It's a bundle of theoretical
issues and a bundle of more empirical relations. The mind body problem equally is not one. Okay,
you can say what is the causal and interaction or what is the metaphysical interpretation of
correlation data between brain and mind or something like that. But there's a whole
how do you say a spectrum of theoretical issues. Some are very old. Like, what is the mechanism
of interaction? Some are very young. For instance, Daniel Dennett, I think has done us all a great
service in his today rather unknown 1969 book content and consciousness to introduce this
distinction between sub personal properties and personal properties beings like us can have. And
then there's this whole Donald Davidson story and so on. In the old debate, that personal level
properties like the having of beliefs, the having of intentions and desires can in principle,
in principle, for conceptual reasons, never be translated down, reduced to sub personal
theoretical entities in the brain or so. So you have multiple distinctions sub personal personal.
What what is causal? What is the most rational metaphysical interpretation of the empirical
data we have. And now to come back to you and psychiatry and being no one as you know, I mean,
for me, it's a strange experience that you ask about this because this was another guy.
This was a quarter century ago, right? And then at some point the difference in how it's changed
over time. Yeah, you know, now I it is a very many authors know this, you know, now I will get
a very substantial and angry email from some Chinese PhD student. But it was
25 years ago, when I sat in the eighth floor of the humanities building in at UC San Diego,
opposite to the office of Paul Churchlet and wrote this. And now I get all the heat
because because people
actually can work with it. And one of my goals was I think philosophers should do that
is to develop conceptual instruments and tools that people in other disciplines can use.
So if a psychiatrist and just like you, I have interacted with psychiatrists a lot during
certain phases of my career comes and says, that is really useful. I can use that in my own research
that I don't understand that that's nonsensical. But this idea is really helpful.
Then I've made a contribution, you know, in interdisciplinary research. And the
psychiatric case studies in being no one, which I used, which are of course now outdated and one
could do many much more precise stuff there than I did 25 years ago. There's also now
computational psychiatry, for instance. So I wanted just to show what is not necessary.
So, you know, to have the more fine grained representational architecture of the conscious
self. Because I realized many philosophers at that time, excellent analytical armchair
philosophers, just didn't know what is possible for a human mind, like, I don't know,
quotas in Rome or something like that. How does it play a role in your own work?
So here, are you a psychiatrically informed philosopher or a philosophically informed doctor?
So I was, there was a time where I was, I thought of being a psychiatrist. So I'm currently just a
medical doctor with a master's in philosophy. But the focus of the masters was in the philosophy
and ethics of mental health. So it was primarily while I was working in psychiatry and doing this
masters. And it was interesting because the textbook was the Oxford textbook and handbook
of philosophy of psychiatry. And that's a very important thing. So it was philosophers of mind
should be uniquely intrigued by psychiatry, the same way psychiatrists should be uniquely intrigued
for what philosophers of mind have to say. And I think that's what drew me to your work in the
first place was because you, you were not just taking philosophical arguments and discussing
these concepts, but you were trying to practically apply these to the real world. And, and I think
that's what you're currently doing with your latest book as well. You're trying to find ways
to apply these, which we'll definitely touch on. But for me personally, I think I love both. I love
the, I love the search for these answers, the philosophical journey, I would say, as well as
the way this would impact my own clinical decision making, because, yeah, because all these first
person's subjective experiences matter when it comes to treating patients who are telling me
third person objective stories. And I think that's very fundamental. And you touch on that
beautifully. I mean, the, oh, just by the way, Thomas, I just wanted to ask, because you spoke
about Francis Crick before I forget about this. And the big discussion you guys had, what did you
think of David Chalmers and Christoph Cox final end to the, to the whole debate?
So I didn't go there this year, because I sensed this might be turned into a big self marketing
show there. But I was of course, the guy who organized ASSC two, this was ASSC 26, and firmly
put the society on a map with a huge conference in Bremen. And that is where Christoph and Dave
actually created that wager that bet they made over a beer. And that was where it was actually
made. I still remember it was a horrible experience. I worked practically a whole year of my life on
that conference with 400 people. And then the computer science department had the famous Easter
crash. And everything was down for three weeks. And we had lost all registration data. So we didn't
know who had paid. We didn't know who had reserved a room for what time. So there were large groups
of students standing when people were streaming into town and faking it and saying, Oh, what's your
name, Dr. Naidu? You had tell me again, because we just didn't know how many bookings we had,
and payments and everything. And I also know that I had 60,000 marks at the time to organize the
conference. And it cost me 110,000. And if that was not a famous, now deceased old neuroscientist
who came to my rescue afterwards, I would have been in big trouble. So this was when Dave and
Christoph were still young guys, and I'm making this. Yeah, so I haven't been there.
Many people think, you know, I have edited this 2000 book with the MIT Press Nora correlates of
consciousness, which reflects some contributions to that conference. And many people today think,
I've heard Julia Tononi tell me this the last time that the NCC approach is basically
failed now. And that we have an enormous amount of data, of course, about neural correlates.
But it hasn't generated the theoretical breakthrough. And now, of course, a lot of the smartest young
people are giving a lot of work and effort into computational modeling, using cough,
resistance, mathematical instruments. And I think this is where we might go in the future,
which, by the way, changes things for young philosophers. When I grew up, I got a lot of
trouble with the philosophical establishment, because I said, and I created young people like
this, you have to be good in one area in philosophy, and you need an interdisciplinary
photo, just as you have psychiatry. There must be one area in neuroscience, like color vision or
dreaming. That's your second hobby. And where you're absolutely up to speed in the empirical
literature, then it gets interesting. Or you go have something in AI, or in evolutionary biology,
or in animal consciousness. And a large part of the philosophical establishment didn't want this,
and I could have made a much better career if I hadn't said this. So now things have changed.
If you today say a young philosopher who wants to do philosophy of mind should have one foot in
neuroscience, it's almost a bit outdated. They should have a diploma in mathematics.
If the journey goes on, as I predict it does, using the free energy principle and the conceptual
tools involved, then it simply excludes a lot of the best young philosophers who don't have this
math, just as I don't have it at their fingertips, from the debate. If that's where the edge of research
moves to, this is also a sociological event. Because then, you know, when I was young, many
German philosophers were trying to hide the fact that they could not participate in international
debates because their English wasn't good enough. But now, it could be that you can't participate
because your math isn't good enough. And this might also apply to many psychiatrists. If this
project of computational psychiatry goes through, I'm not going to say anything about
psychoanalysis. I'm going to be polite, but a lot of this stuff is going to look
like some outdated New Age fantasies or something like this, some esotericism. And I must say,
in philosophy of psychiatry, tell me what your experience is. But I've had conflicts
with German psychiatrists who are very well-meaning, because there is this branch of phenomenological
psychiatry where people actually are on the theory level of 1940, Ludwig Binswanger, that kind of thing.
That's where they stopped thinking about philosophy and theory. And then their practice
a whole lot. And if they have a certain subgroup, you tell me if this is the same in South Africa.
And psychiatrists have an anti-reductionist ideology. And that's very strong for them. It goes
together with pop phenomenology. And I think that's all fine. They should believe that.
But what I don't like, if somebody acts out their own ideology on suffering people,
on people who have a real serious problem, in these cases, we need just the best evidence-based
theories we have. And we have to be super rational. But I found in my research career in
interacting with psychiatrists, then many of them are a little ideology-driven. And
are neither well-informed about empirical facts in neuropsychology or neuroscience,
nor do they know anything about current debates in philosophy. Would something like this be true
in the South Africa? I think yes, very much so. I think especially because we saw
culturally diverse here in South Africa that you tend to notice when someone
from a completely different background is treating a patient who completely does not
understand what this person is talking about. And you see these culture clashes sort of playing
a big role in how it's very miscommunicated constantly. And the person who comes from their
own different culture sort of indoctrinates the other person or almost talks down to them.
If it's, let's say, a doctor who's well-educated, a psychiatrist who feels superior and talks to
someone who, let's say, grew up on a farm in the middle of a region of South Africa that's
very rural and non-educated. And you can tell the sort of ideologies that this person has
and is placing on this person. Perhaps someone of African culture and descent who
believes in completely different gods, completely different ways of living, values clash completely.
And it's opening up certain spheres of philosophical debate. There's one known as
African values-based practice where you have to sort of incorporate values and understand
that even when we treat patients, implicitly, there's normativity applied to everything we
do on a day-to-day basis. And we can never forget this. And psychiatrists often forget this. And
it was a part of that. When I learned about this, I realized the blurry lines between
when you dissect psychiatry philosophically, it really does change the way you perceive the
field altogether. And not you can actually trust neural correlates of consciousness the way we
talk about it or not. And how we should actually apply this knowledge that we have. Because most
of the time, we don't really even know the difference between physical illness, bodily illness,
and mental illness, and the direct or indirect links they really have. And that makes it very
tough on this side as well. Yes, you know, at first, where I first saw something, when I studied
philosophy, it was even if you wanted to get women, it was very important to do something
with psychoanalysis and Marxism. That was the hottest and the coolest stuff that's where all
the good-looking women were. And I realized that it's a bit like poetry, but the psychoanalysis,
but I don't know what is wrong with it. And then then once in passing, just said this,
we talked about personal level properties and sub-personal level properties. And he said,
if you introduce little persons in the brain or somewhere to explain personal level properties,
you explain nothing, you've just explained them uncally. And then he suddenly said, well,
the super ego and the id, these are actually, they don't explain anything because they are
themselves described as personal level properties. And that was sometimes in your life, somebody just
says that in passing. And it really opens a perspective to your life. That's when I understood
that this is really also not open to improvement, to empirical improvement. But to this day,
I don't know about South Africa, but in Germany, in Europe, I mean, it's firmly established psychoanalysis
as a completely false theory of the human mind guides therapeutic action. And
I've heard psychiatrist friends of mine say, well, as long as you can make a living and earn
money with it, that long, you will have that. And so psychiatry is actually an interesting case
where people have, they must have theories of mind or theory of what the conscious mind is.
And they try to heal, they try to alleviate suffering. And then there are other people in
philosophy who have also theories of mind, who are absolutely clueless. If you tell them, yeah,
but you know, you can consciously experience thoughts without ownership. It's not necessary.
That there is a thinking cell. I mean, I know times where colleagues said this is conceptually
excluded. This cannot be the case in this world. So many old fashioned philosophers have these
a priori assumptions about what is necessary in the human mind. And then nobody listens anymore,
because now we have so many empirical data will show that it can be otherwise. But then again,
psychiatrists, this has to be said, who also have a very high workload in their everyday life,
and are under pressure. And you cannot really demand from them to read peer reviewed papers
from analytical philosophy of mind. It's a difficult situation. It needs these conceptual
instruments. But they are in this everyday, you know, they have to make decisions.
Under time pressure. And with great suffering. At the time when I was writing also in German
and speaking about the self model, I often had patients contacting me, which was often a
harrowing experience. So something that's a time back. I had schizophrenics find me out
privately or their relatives. And they were seriously convinced they had a philosophical
problem. You know, they read the ego tunnel. I see. And then I said, no, please listen to me,
you have to go into treatment. 1% of the world population have this. And then they say, no,
no, no, you don't understand. I just want to understand the self model. I say, no, please.
Is there a relative in the room? And I've had a lot of moving experience. For instance, one time,
I was invited to the psychiatric department at the University Clinic of Frankfurt, my hometown,
gave a big talk about the self model. And in the course, you know, a lecture hall
of explaining that there's no such thing as a self. I realized that a considerable number
of bored patients in how do you say in English, they're nightgowns. Yes, and they're,
you know, they're comfortable house shoes had walked in from the ward that there were actually
patients sitting in there. And not only psychiatry professors. And watching the faces during my talk,
I realized this is not good, what I'm doing. There are some people in this audience who shouldn't
be here that they shouldn't, they shouldn't hear that. It's shocking for them. And somebody let
them in. I don't know, do you let your patients go to lectures? That's what I'm saying. It's
it's such a difficult bridge to tiptoe on because you never know, even with philosophy in general,
you never know what type of philosophical insights might trigger a psychotic episode.
I mean, there's so many different, and that's what my master's focused on. And it really,
that's what actually almost swayed me away from psychiatry, because I didn't go through with it.
Now I just practice as a regular medical doctor, which just happens to have a master's event
out that I'm not really technically I'm not applying it, but I think I'm always applying it.
But because there's so many different facets behind this, how do you approach it philosophically?
How do you approach it psychiatrically without ignoring the philosophy? Because
these two fields are completely intertwined, and we can never really separate these two. And I
think it's in order to do that. I think you cannot approach both of these topics without
including the other often say that when you try and make a conclusion regarding the mind-body
problem to not incorporate the atypical or the illness side of the mind, then you've
completely uninformed decision. And I think that's why it's great that at the moment you're
applying this all the time. And you mentioned Dennis and this passing moment and how he did that to
you. I want when you think about Thomas, your view on consciousness altogether, because I know
you consider this self to be an illusion. I mean, we're obviously, it's a phenomenal self model that
we've created. When you take it far as consciousness, do you sort of head towards
Dennis' definition of consciousness? Do you take it to an illusionism view of consciousness as well?
Well, I have to confess, I'm getting sidetracked again, because listening to you,
I have to make a footnote first. My psychology professor friends all know that they have a
large population of students who come actually come to university with a self-healing project.
In philosophy, you do have office hours too, you know. And the truth is,
there is a small but considerable subset of philosophy students who take the subjects
because they want to find a reason not to commit suicide. And I have seen this, just what you
mentioned, to study philosophy properly can cause psychological crisis in some serious young people,
some, you know, for instance, when they come from Muslim backgrounds or Catholic households,
and they are for the first time confronted with arguments for atheism or something like this,
and they go into it for a whole semester seriously, it can create big problems. But then,
of course, there are also people who say it's people from South Africa who have good arguments
to say that non-existence is to be preferred over existence, and you will have
some young people with whom this resonates very strongly. So philosophers know this
in another way. Now, before I get to illusionism, I have to say I think the way out is to change
the incentive structure in the educational system and in universities. We need something
that I have called died in the rule inter-disciplinary. So we need a whole generation
of students who do, for instance, psychiatry and philosophy in parallel,
but who get rewarded because it's extra work to be good in two disciplines at the same time,
who have an incentive structure to do that. What we do have is this fake inter-disciplinarity
in writing grants together and trying to get money, and then we all just, as soon as we have the money,
we pursue our own hobbies, you know, and not that. So it has, you actually have to create a new
generation of young people, and if the political system doesn't manage it, to make it attractive for
them, to, you know, be to track research personalities, psychiatry and philosophy, and invest the
extra work, then there will take other trajectories in the academic career universe, and you will not
have the psychiatrists you are asking for. Illusionism. My confession, not with Dennett,
but I have perceived this as, and I may be absolutely wrong, as one of these constructed
debates, some people organize to get traction and eventually get tenure and create a little debate.
So you can tell me a little bit about what illusion, because I really haven't followed
the research literature. So where I start is, I have sometimes in my popular writings said
something that was false, that one shouldn't say, namely the self is an illusion. This is
false for at least two reasons. One, illusions are somebody's illusions.
Second, if you define your terms properly, a hallucination would be a sensory misrepresentation
where the object actually does not exist, whatever the voices, whatever you see.
An illusion would be a sensory misrepresentation, a distortion, where a perceptual object
actually does exist in the outward. These are the proper definitions. In that sense,
consciousness cannot be an illusion. In that sense, so I always had the feeling at the beginning,
this is a bit flaky, vague, right at the beginning, I get what they're saying,
I want to try to get at. But of course, if you know my own theory about the PMIR,
about the phenomenal model of the intentionality relationship, I have said that the self model
is not just about the emotions, the thoughts the organism has, but that there's actually
in the human conscious model of reality a representation of what philosophers like
Franz Prentano or Edmund Husser have called the era of intentionality, the intentionality
relationship. So being directed at a perceptual object or being directed as satisfaction conditions
at an action goal is actually that is something that is represented in us. And that is also what
a first person perspective is, you know, it's very dynamic.
Now, of course, it is part of most of our self models
that we are conscious right now. And in the forthcoming book, I will say,
and provide empirical evidence that exactly this is false. It's not you that has the property
of being conscious, but the epistemic space as a whole. It's just normally I call this the
contraction principle, and it's maybe a bit too much to go into details here. It's contracted in
normal non altered states of consciousness. It's contracted in the experience of a knowing self.
I call this an epistemic agent model. So the model of an entity that wants to know
selects goals of knowing forms concept directs its attention. That is an agent that an epistemic
agent and active information hungry system that tries to know learn more about the world and
itself. That's an epistemic agent. And an absolutely central part of our self model is that epistemic
agent model. Now, if you see where this goes, you know, you also spoke about when I watch,
I think that I was watching one of your lectures on, you were talking about an autonomy, the mental
self control, the veto control, and then you did bring this up at some point. I remember
you did bring about the fact that we have these epistemic agent model as well.
And was this the lecture you gave on where you spoke about wandering minds at that point?
I think so. Yes, I'm not working in this field anymore, but I have published four
philosophical papers on mind wandering. And I'm kind of proud that the first one is basically the
first one for a century, because I thought for, especially for philosophers. It is very important
to take note of the new empirical research on, as I call it, task unrelated spontaneous thought,
mind wandering daydreaming, because the very simple factor, a lot of details is that
we are not in control of our own cognitive processes for more than 50% of our conscious
lifetime. That's a safe conservative estimate. And I still remember when truly I talked to some
eminent philosophers about mind wandering and the repeated collapse of the epistemic agent model.
So I think when you have control over your focus of attention and listen to me, you have a stable
epistemic agent model, but then you very often have a brief attentional lapse and think about
what you have to do tomorrow or what your next question should be. And then that epistemic
agent model collapses and has to be reconstructed. So in my view, mind wandering episodes always
begin with a collapse of the epistemic agent model. That doesn't mean that the daydream cannot
be about a future epistemic agent model that complicates things. But then you come back to
in the present moment after a certain time, right? And I still remember some years ago,
I talked to these really excellent philosophers, and somebody I really like, William Seger from
Toronto said, now after the talk, come on, now this is, I have been listening to you for 60 minutes.
Are you saying I have not been listening? That there were interruptions
and I said, yes, maybe a few hundred, maybe a couple of dozen. And he said, but you're not,
this is not phenomenologically realistic. You don't say while I'm listening,
have been listening for one hour to you, I've had constant interruptions and lapses in listening to
me and say, yes, that's what the data show. And the interesting thing was Bill and some
others just didn't believe it. Just didn't believe it. They say, this is not true. This is not my
own experience. I'm a stable knowing self. I've listened to you for many minutes. And that's
an interesting discussion, you know. I feel sorry, I think my mind wandered off a bit there,
because I accidentally took you off track there. When you were talking about these epistemic,
these agents and these minds trying to understand your theory of consciousness a little bit more,
do you feel that it's more of a linguistic problem that we are? Linguistics are playing a
big role in us and our limitations in describing these phenomenological experiences. Do you believe
that that's a major factor that hinders us from solving this problem? Well, that's the deep classical
insight of analytical philosophy of mind. It of course does. But now I think we have a much better
and fine grained way to describe what is actually happening. There's a hyper prior landscape in
our brain, a landscape of very abstract assumptions. For example, about what a thought is, who the
thinker is currently, and what the epistemic agent is. And you can have, if you have through
cultural embedding and through language games you've played, you have a strong assumption
that you are actually a continuous entity, a continuous epistemic agent. You need very careful,
you need meditation retreats, you need a meditation practice, you need very carefully trained
introspection to discover that that's actually not true. As you will top down shape your own
experience of your own thought flow like this, and you will of course speak like this, this will
reinforce the whole process socially, and you may not discover subtleties in your own experience.
Unless neuroscientists come and do experiments with mind wandering and say, yeah, but people,
if you test it, they have so many lapses. And they don't realize them. So the interesting thing
about it is that just as most people walk through their everyday life, automatically thinking,
neurotically planning, being haunted by unbidden memories, without even noticing that they are
thinking. The same, of course, happens with these lapses and the mind wandering. Most people
do not even realize that they're absent-minded. Unless you do something like experience sampling
and fix a buzzer, a buzzer to your arm and whenever it buzzes, you ask yourself,
have I been on task? And you're like, no, I was planning the holiday. But if the buzzer
hadn't been there, you would think I was just washing dishes and I was paying attention all the
time. And so I think if one refines introspection with the help of empirical research, one may
discover that many philosophical assumptions about the human mind, for instance, the stability of
the epistemic agent model, actually falls. And you're talking like this all the time,
reinforcing it. Maybe some psychiatric patients are very sensitive people who have a
better than average introspection and discover these discontinuities in themselves and get
buried by them, could be. I was on that note, I was speaking to, when I spoke to Carl Friston,
we spoke about this phenomenon in psychiatry where someone who's acutely psychotic,
schizophrenic patient, acute psychosis, and you know the visual illusions, the checkered
board illusion, all those famous ones, the blue dress, those types of famous visual illusions.
A lot of the times when these acutely psychotic patients are having this episode,
they don't tend to fall for it as much as the average human does.
And that's a very fascinating set of research done because it begs the question of how this
psychosis has completely revamped the way they perceive reality. So while we might consider
them to be acutely psychotic and quote unquote not seeing reality for what it is, they're actually
seeing reality for a little bit more verticality than we are actually seeing. So there's something
hyperacuity and that hyperacuity might of course be lower into higher levels and then
cause problems there. Yes, I've had interesting conversations with people in a closed ward.
Unfortunately, both close friends who both are dead now. The most interesting thing for me is if
you have a very careful conversation and you go along and you can say, you know that this step,
this is not consensus reality anymore. This is what nobody believes. This isn't there, the towers,
the towers where they're watching you. And they are absolutely aware of it. They can even say,
I know this is not your reality, but it is my and I cannot help it.
That is very interesting. It also has to do with the transparency of reality models. I mean,
I don't know what the solution will be, but a very interesting question is of course how
to become representations of the world that the brain generates
real, like irrevocably real, and how do they become opaque and just
like say in derealization syndrome or something become unreal. What are these mechanisms? I've
also been fascinated by this. Most philosophers just think, well, this is just reality, perceptual
reality out there in a household person. But in epileptic seizures, under the influence of hallucinogens,
there is phenomenological hyperrealism. It's just like the volume control for
realness can be turned up and down in depression, in depersonalization, as you know, much better than
I do. The realness can go down even the realness of one's own body. What is that? And I have great
hope that computational psychiatry will be able to describe this. What makes it real?
One thing I'm already only recently beginning to understand is it may be that we have a better
theory about how psychosis happens, how complex hallucinations occur.
But this might still not mean that we can help people or cure people, because the human brain,
the human mind is such a complex thing. Do you have any view on how this might be brought into
therapeutic efficacy? Yeah, I think there's certain ways. I know what Carl Friston we spoke about.
So when you think about free energy principle, and actually when I wrote that paper where I
quoted you a couple of times, I spoke about how when you use that principle, or if you use
hierarchical Bayesian brains and active inference as a theory to approach psychiatry,
and then you go into computational psychiatry, you can then talk about the prior information
that you take in and the posterior conclusions that you make. So let's say you use virtual
reality for an example, or you take a bunch of virtual reality headset and place it on a patient,
you can almost try and shift the prior information they constantly get on a day-to-day
basis, tailor their reality to something that we have to first prove, obviously with evidence,
seems to lower the episodic rate of psychosis. So if we almost put them into a new reality
that slightly aligns with their physical reality a bit more, and almost remove some of the deluded
thoughts or the perceptual hallucinations that they experience, you can almost assist them in
that regard. But then we end up falling into the trap of possibly inducing psychotic. So it's
because we've altered the perception of reality, and this is why I find it so difficult to apply
many of these. Yeah, I mean, the tools are coming. There are some very interesting
results I vaguely remember with anorexia and body distortion, perception disorders.
A very interesting but also sobering thing I saw many years in Milan and in Italy
is they took a number of psychotic patients without insight and professional actors from
the theater, and the actors played the patients exactly what the patient says and what he or she
does. And the interesting thing was that caused insight. So while they're watching somebody
playing themselves, they suddenly realize they're ill and there's a reason that they're here. But
the curtain closes again after the intervention. It's not a lasting insight. And that's, of course,
an interesting question. Like, how do you get, I mean, you are ill, you think you're someone.
How do you get a lasting insight into the non-existence of self? A question Buddhists
have asked, of course. And a big part of a mental state examination is, and while often
psychiatrists will use a MSE, is what they call it, and MSE, so mental state examination. So
one of the main factors is insight in judgment. So when they're assessing you, one of the key
things they'll write down is either poor insight in judgment or maybe fair insight, poor judgment.
Because sometimes, even if they have all the insight they need, the judgment regarding the
insight they have still doesn't correlate and correspond. So it's so difficult to actually get
down to what they really want or need. Another thing you could use, let's say virtual reality for
would be exposure therapies. So if someone has a serious fear of heights, maybe just to slowly
bring them while knowing they're in a safe environment to utilize it in that regard. But
that's just technology, though. That's not necessarily an application of a theoretical model,
I would say. So an ordinary, so-called neurotypical and healthy citizen,
how do you rate them on insight? That's exactly what the focus was on. I'm both
offered from Oxford. I mean, that's what he takes books about, is that we just cannot draw lines
like that. It's such a blurry spectrum in general, which is how I see consciousness at this point.
We don't really know. There's so many different ways to define it. How do you actually draw lines
with anything? But does that relate? Can we come back to your question of illusionism?
Oh, yes, yes. Imagine an extreme case, rare case of Quotas syndrome,
where a patient will claim that he is dead and asks for the body to be disposed of.
And will claim that he's not conscious. I mean, that is something we know. It can happen
that human beings are firmly convinced that they are dead and also have no mind.
Does this tell us anything about illusionism? Or is this just rare anecdotal material?
Well, I think it actually could tell people that the phenomenon is possible. So that's where I
think someone like the I don't know if you're familiar with the new defenders of these types
of theories like Keith Frankish, who firmly, what he describes is more of a ways I phenomenal
experience. So he says that these experiences are existing. It's the way we're defining them
to be more real than they actually are. So we're giving them this almost essence like quality.
And I think that's where he specifically says, no, this is not actually correct.
It's quasi-phenomenal. It is something that's happening. It's more the phenomenal nature of it.
That intentionality or the aboutness that a lot of philosophers talk about
is what he's referring to that's not necessarily there.
So and I think that's where Dennett also goes with it as well. But honestly,
I can't speak for them. I don't really.
Well, I think there is a completely underrated paper which appeared in 1988
by Kathy Wilkis, also the late Kathy Wilkis, an Oxford philosopher,
who has a very simple point. She went through all languages and said that way over 90% of
the languages that have evolved on this planet do not have a word for consciousness.
I don't know if this would still stand to test by today's linguistics,
but I believe it's probably true. So she makes this very funny move that she says,
yeah, that happened after the Cartesian catastrophe. That's a problem that emerged in
certain small circles in Europe 350 years ago. The rest of humankind never had a problem of
consciousness. You know, they have to be infected with it a little bit. And that is also
interesting. Why have so many human beings or cultures not evolved?
The concept of consciousness that puzzles us so much now. It's like they never saw the need
to describe something. I think they will understand what wakefulness is.
I think most human beings will understand that what it means to be awake.
You can also possess. So I haven't read Frankish or I don't know this debate. But would it tell us
something to know that there are certain kinds of coma where you have all the physiological
signs of being awake. You have a sleep wake rhythm. You even have gaze following movements,
sometimes which make it very hard for the relatives. But definitely also retrospective
reports, no conscious experience. The patient doesn't know they exist.
And at the same time, in ordinary folks, we have wakefulness plus a conscious experience of
wakefulness. We can feel wakefulness. I say a lot about this in the forthcoming book where I have
500 reports where meditators from 57 countries in the world describe the experience of pure
awareness itself. And of course, it has a lot to do with just clarity and the experience of
wakefulness. So you can be awake and not know it. And you can be awake and awake. Like hopefully
the two of us are now doing. Does this tell us something about illusionism?
That's a tough one. Look, I remember when I wrote my essay back, this was years ago as well.
I at the time believed in it quite firmly. And not anymore. I mean, I think that I think this
podcast specifically has completely changed the way I perceive consciousness in general. And I've
spoken to so many different philosophers, neuroscientists, psychiatrists, psychologists,
that at this point, I find myself just not knowing where I stand. I often say I'm ontologically
agnostic regarding this concept at this point. I'm very intrigued by all the epistemology,
everything we can talk about, but I'm almost unconvinced by all of them and very convinced
by most of them at the same time. Okay, let me add to your confusion. I think
consciousness is not a subjective phenomenon. Because we have empirical evidence
for conscious experience without a first person perspective. So I'm not going to go into details,
but say empirical data on ego dissolution under psychedelics, or the phenomenology of
advanced practitioners of meditation, where there is just awareness without anybody we see
that all the stronger philosophical notions of subjectivity, like epistemological notions,
or even metaphysical notions, I would claim are grounded in our conscious experience of
being a knowing self directed at the world. That's where this issue comes from consciousness is
an intrinsically subjective phenomenon. And that's why it cannot be explained.
But now we do have mounting empirical data that conscious experience can actually exist without
an experiential perspective, somebody directed at it. So couldn't it in these cases be something
that not a person has, but that an organism has? Even Thomas Nagel said that in an unknown paper
called the boundaries of inner space in 1969, he says, if we, he said, we may have to fall back
onto the notion of an organism, if we cannot describe it as a personal level property. So the
brute awareness or the consciousness of it all. So could it actually be that
we are blinded by the fact that in almost all cases where we actually enjoy conscious experience,
there is always a knowing self and a perspective? I agree. I think it's, it's, it's one of those
things. There's, there's some great work being done at the moment by Michael Levin.
Uh-huh. Tell me. And so he, well, he works with bioelectrical networks and what he slowly
tried, I also don't want to, I'm just going to paraphrase, because honestly, his work is so
complex that I even barely understand some of the concepts myself. But for the most part,
he's trying to blur this line completely of what intelligence is and what a big role this plays
for our own understanding of what consciousness is. And to show that even cells, even, and I'm
not talking about neurons, I'm talking about general cells, um, have electrical communication
that occurs, that if you disrupt or disturb it or even reprogram some of the electrical
communication, you can fundamentally change the way the cell will proliferate and develop
general. So that means this communication between cells that go beyond just chemical.
And, and rather this is neurochemical communication and intelligence nonetheless.
And the goal, I think, I mean, he's working, there's other people like Chris Fields,
Mark Psalms, Carl Friston, that they're sort of combining all these different fields together
and, and coming up, drawing slowly conclusions using Markov blankets and just various different
as fields. Yeah, just to sort of show us and blur this line even more of what we really consider
to be intelligent, conscious, um, in general. And I think it's sort of a fantastic program and great
work. Yes, it's exciting times. And from my point of view, the real question is if you can
find scale invariant abstract principles that go through from physics to biology
to the expression in our own brains with conscious experience. And I think they're
basically there. I mean, Carl's story is basically anchored in statistical physics.
And we can see how this can be nested on different timescales. But still, I think
there's no such thing as panpsychism. Of course, these abstract computational properties
that go through the levels, they will have different strengths or so. But if you would say
that cells or even protons have proto-phenomenal properties, that's one of the sexy stuff people
like to hear. Then you get, then you get just another question. So why is our expression
of this form of being conscious so very different and so, so much richer? You just kick the, you,
how do you say, you re-confront the problem on a higher level. If you say there are similar
principles at work through all scales. But there is, of course, something unique
in waking up from dreamless deep sleep. There is something very dramatic happening there.
And the question is, of course, it's also a bit unsettling. I think the motive,
the unadmitted motive for many people who are interested in the metaphysical side of consciousness
and all that, is that they look for a clever way to satisfy one of the deepest emotional needs,
all of us have, which is mortality denial. So if you want to make a career in a philosophy of
consciousness, you have to find some, you can't say anything crazy or wrong, but you have to
offer people a sexy back door, something like proto-phenomenalism or something like
panpsychism. Then you get a lot of intention. And that is because of often unadmitted basic
motive is, but could it exist after death? Could it exist after the biological brain has died?
And this deep need, which also is something computational. I have introduced a term that's
called existence bias. And David Benatar would immediately understand it. We are beings who
will always opt to continue their own existence, even if it's not in their own best interest,
even if it's obvious, even to them, that this will just increase the overall negative balance
of suffering. And there's a reason for this. I think Karl's story helps us to understand
why we suffer from existence bias, because we have to stay in a very, very narrow window
of certain parameters to stay alive. The process can be described as finding evidence for one's
own existence, as predicting, continuously predicting our own existence, to put it
falsely and in a very primitive way. We were never meant to simulate future worlds in which
we didn't have a lot of healthy offspring or in which we were dead. Of course, for short-term
risk management, we have to recognize I might be dead if I do that. That's a separate thing.
But in principle, also, I say in the new book, we are an embodied existence bias.
We are resistant, resistance. We resist thermodynamics in an amazing, highly improbable
way. You know how improbable it was that you and I haven't dropped dead of our chairs during this
conversation? Physically, it's a bizarre event. You know, that systems like that
should evolve that far away from thermodynamic equilibrium somehow create a stable state,
but we do it. And this is one of my favorite philosophers, Jacob Howey,
at Monash University, as described in a recent paper, because we follow an inner norm.
And that norm is this existence bias. Now, my point is the existence bias on a psychological
and psychiatric level leads to mortality denial and to what the Buddhists have called
the thirst for existence. We have this thirst for continuing existence, non-existence,
somehow almost is no option for us. And as long as we're healthy, as long as we're
mentally healthy. But my point is this also spills over in our theoretical treatment of
consciousness. Most of us normal human beings who are not monks, who have renunciated the world
and are ready to go into non-existence. Most of us that read these books about consciousness
have this deep, and this is not something intellectual, my existence bias. It's a
computational principle I embody in my cells, existence bias. And we want to find out, can
this help me, proving my own existence? Can this help me developing a delusion? Because
now part two is we have a problem that probably no other animal on this planet has. We know,
I'll express it in free energy terms again, that our predictive horizon will eventually shrink
to zero. We know that we will die cognitively. That is what I call in the new book a toxic form
of self-knowledge. It's a major danger to our self-model. Evolution didn't want this. If we want
to stay functional in seeing our own mortality so clearly, we need to tweak our model of reality.
States of consciousness are phenomenal models of reality. And that is where religious delusion
starts. This is where we have to find a way to come to terms with this, to deal with our mortality
because we are an embodied existence bias. And that is a big problem most people don't see if
you want to make a theory of consciousness. Because nobody wants to hear eliminative materialism.
Everybody wants to have something that's a little mystery. You know what I mean?
Yeah, I get completely what you're saying. I mean, it's almost that little bit of an
Iain Vitelle, something that makes you special, something that almost you're going.
Yes, of course. And you want any solution that doesn't leave a door open for that prediction,
simulation of future selves might go on after physical death. Everything that says no,
your predicted horizon will shrink to zero doesn't feel right to beings like us.
It feels unhealthy. It feels not good for the integrity of our self model. And that's the problem
materialists are really ruthless scientists or philosophers have, because there's a crowd out
there. And the crowd says, yeah, but this is a disenchantment of the world. On a God level,
this doesn't feel like, I like the heart problem of consciousness. I like that better. And isn't
panpsychism that, you know, that has an appeal? And that's a major barrier in making a theory of
consciousness. Thomas, the name of your book, it's a very German word. Do you want to just say it
for me quickly? And just for the listeners in the US? What? The name of the book, the forthcoming
book. Or the forthcoming book is where we use MIT Press in English, The Elephant and the Blind.
And of course, there's a German version of it too. How do you say the German word? Because I've been
trying to pronounce this for a while. The Elephant and the Blind. Okay. And it is, of course, that
metaphor is describes exactly our situation in trying to understand what consciousness is, you
know, some people have a flank, some people have the trunk, some some blind people have the tail.
They're all right. Then complete disagreement with each other. And the way I was actually
talking about is is Bavoud Steinskultur. Is that is that the word? Oh, that is the latest book,
which hasn't found an English publisher yet. That is out since 6th of January. Yes, yes.
That is a different. Do you want to know about Bavoud Steinskultur now?
I know how to pronounce that one. That that was about creating a cultural context, where we also
ask normative questions, questions like what is a good state of consciousness? Yes, yes. Will,
of course, apply to psychiatry? Sure. I mean, you spoke, I think there was a point where I
heard you discussing the fact that you look for what is it a negative utilitarian approach to
yes, to life. And I was really curious to know about a bit more about that work on your view on
that and how it touches on the mind in general. I'm a bit hesitant to go into that for two reasons.
One is I'm not up to speed on the technical literature on negative utilitarianism. I have to
say that. I just, I mean, I've peeped into it a bit and I have certain intuitions, which I can
explain. And second, I have found that it is one of the question you have just asked is
one of the philosophical issues that are hard to discuss in the public.
Yes, not true. Because they hurt some people too much. I think some people don't want to go.
That question. Let's just, we'll scratch that. I'm going to edit that. No, no, no, no, no. I'm going.
I think it's a very tenable position. I don't know about Benatar's specific exposition and the
argument, but it's a very tenable position that life is not worth living and that existence is not
in our own best interest. I even have put a thought experiment out on the web, which is called
the barn scenario, which is called benevolent artificial antinatalism, which makes the assumption
that a superintelligence emerges. And it is not in any way misaligned with our interests or unethical,
quite the opposite. It is, of course, much better in moral cognition than ourselves.
It's fully on our side. It's not an end event. It's a benevolent superintelligent.
And it discovers that nonexistence is in our own best interest and that for reasons
of self-deception mechanisms that evolution has put into our brains, we are not able to see this
fact that nonexistence is better. For me, it's completely obvious that we just state this that
if you see humankind as a whole, it is an ocean of suffering and confusion. I would even
expand this to sentient life on this planet. I think evolution is nothing to be glorified.
On this planet, it has created an ocean, an absolutely unfathomable ocean of suffering,
this fear of death, anxiety in an enormous number of conscious individuals that didn't
exist at this place in the physical universe before. So actually, we are in a highly problematic
situation or highly problematic here. And I mean, of course, evolution is also something
fantastic that has created all these beauties and the forms. But I think for me, it is highly
intuitive that an ordinary human life contains more suffering than joy. And I call this NP,
negative phenomenology, very simply defined as all states which the system,
if it had a choice, would rather not live through. And I can, if you want to, do you want two more
minutes about this topic? We can. Yeah, we can go. Yeah. So I wanted to do an experience sampling
study, but never got to it. But I did a pilot study with, I think, 12 or 17 of my PhD students
in my group. So it was, so the question was this, you're going to get for one week,
you're going to get random SMS messages at different times. And whenever your phone buzzes,
you check, is this a moment I would take with me into the afterlife? So the thought
experience is like that. There is an afterlife. But it's called the eternal playlist thought
experiment. But you will not have any new experiences after death. You can make a selection
from those experiences you have created before you died. And they will buy a random randomized
algorithm that will be played back to you in eternity after death. So the question is how
many moments in your life do you actually have if you look there, where you say, oh, I would take
this with me into life after death. So I think we did, I have to, I think we did 100 samples.
Then you lose about 30 people don't hear the phone buzzing, you get 70.
70 data points from every student. And the two arguably two smart ones were embarrassed to say
that they had no, in the course of a whole week, they had no moment that was so good
that they would take it into the afterlife. Other people made other ugly discoveries. For
instance, they got into trouble with their girlfriend because the girlfriend realized
when they're hanging out of the court couch with her in the phone buzzes, he never says this was
a good moment. He never does anything on his phone. So I think the average was something like seven to
eight good moments or less per week. And then philosophical discussion exploded. That was
even more interesting. So all these brilliant young PhD students said, yeah, but this doesn't show
anything. And I'm writing a PhD thesis and I'm making a contribution to mankind. And it absolutely
doesn't matter if I'm lonely, or if I'm unhappy. This doesn't say anything about the value of life
or boom, I couldn't say anything anymore. The defense mechanisms were up. But what I would
really like to do is a large, hurl bird style, experience sampling studies, just asking people
a large number of people this last moment before the buzzer rang. Would you want to
take it into the afterlife or not? As a criterion for a moment that where life was worth living.
And my working hypothesis is these moments are rare, much rarer than we think.
We all confabulate, like patients confabulating. No, I'm having a great life.
Yes, we've got that positivity bias built in, just remembering all the good times.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. So I think there is a point to be made that phenomenologically.
And I find it so interesting that the free energy principle actually tells the same story
that a human life is one big uphill battle. In my view, if we are honest to ourselves,
it's a strenuous affair to stay sane in a world like this. I mean, to protect your mental health
or your dignity, another topic in a world like this. It's difficult. It costs a lot of energy.
And it would probably be much better for all of us if we could at least partly
admit this to each other, maybe also doctors to patients that life is very often not easy for us.
And that we frequently, all of us have experiences of losing control.
The philosophical problem, of course, is, you know, there's all this in the consciousness
community, all this talk about color vision and, you know, cell food. But we don't have a good
theory of what suffering is. I mean, what is psychological suffering? What is that the nastiness
of it? Can there be a common computational principle? I think they came, you know, maybe it's
if the rate of prediction error minimization goes down unexpectedly,
you know, if you unexpectedly see that you're not doing well,
that that gets existential and psychologically unsettling. I think it would be a major
achievement to have an abstract theory of suffering. And then ask the question,
how can this be alleviated? Because I think if there's any norm, so you asked about negative
utilitarianism, I think, because for two reasons, I make it very simple, there's more suffering in
the world than joy. And second, there is a shared moral intuition in almost all cultures
that we can draw on, not get into deep philosophical debates, that it is more important
to help a suffering person suffer less than to make a neutral or happy person more happy.
Almost all people can agree on this. And I think a practical ethics can be developed from this,
that one say, admit to each other that we're suffering beings and focus on the alleviation
of suffering. The important point, of course, is that this also applies to those people who are not
yet born to future persons. They are suffering matters too. And, you know, climate catastrophe
and everything, they have no party in parliament. They have no lawyers who fight for them.
That's why David Benito's work, sorry, sorry. That's where that huge chunk of David Benito's
work. I mean, he's probably not too far from here. Because UCT is a UCT professor in Cape Town.
Well, I think he was. But yeah, I mean, when I read that work, I find it very intriguing.
But in your own work, I mean, how do you deal with it as a medical doctor?
Does it not sometimes creep up on you that there's so much suffering?
At all the time. I mean, every time you see it. And it does make you question. I mean,
I've questioned it many times myself, like, whether do I want to have kids? Is this?
Do you?
I think I don't know. I don't really, I don't have kids yet, but really not sure. And it's mostly
because of what you're talking about. I think factoring all the problems that we've got so far
and and what they can expect. I mean, it doesn't look too bright. It doesn't look too great.
No, no, of course. In Germany, there's now an increasing number of young people
who have themselves sterilized or do not have children, not because of grand philosophical
arguments, but because of the climate catastrophe, because they just think it's reckless.
I was there 40 years ago. It has always been quite obvious to me. But I also find,
I mean, if you start discussing these issues, in a way, it's as if you begin to confront the
power of evolution itself, the resistance in people will be so strong. You know, if you say,
have you ever thought about the possibility that you may have inbuilt mechanisms of self-deception?
For most people, and I also think one shouldn't force discussions or things like that on people who
just do not want to hear about this. But of course, there is a classical philosophical
issues and I mean, there are classical answers. Christians have said this is a serious place.
Buddhists have said all life is suffering. And I have one paper in this edited volume,
The Return of Consciousness, which is called Suffering. I think this speaks also a bit to
the shallowness of the current debate. Because there are a lot of people who are trying to make
a brilliant academic career in neuroscience or philosophy with very smart ideas. But
there's this elephant in the room that conscious experience not only involves
out of body experiences and color vision and stuff we're all interested in.
But that it is maybe a mechanism to drive a gene-copying device forward.
I mean, I have no final verdict on this and I'm not sure if I were to read up on the technical
literature on negative utilitarianism if it is at all tenable. What the situation on the
analytical research frontier here is. But I see when we share an intuition there.
I think so. I think we definitely do. Thomas, sorry about that break because South Africa
we have load shedding. It's called load shedding. Literally, this is a thing in South Africa where
the country is so corrupt and we've got so much going on where they cannot generate enough power.
And because of this, they have rolling blackouts in the country and sometimes up to four hours,
four times a day. So you get stuck with almost half the day with no electricity. So right now
I've got no power. I'm using a generator and inverters to sort of kick everything in.
Well, I hope one time in my life I make it. I'm the Asia guy. I've traveled a lot
in the South East Asia in my life. I've never made it south of Morocco or Egypt.
I think if you do come to South Africa, you come straight to my city Cape Town.
Yeah, it's beautiful. You'd love it. And you'd also love a lot of the academic work that's being
done on the side is quite amazing as well. So I think we've touched on certain ethics
applications of how we can understand consciousness from the mind-body problem
to the practical implications of psychiatry. Your forthcoming book, The Elephant and the Blind,
can you give us a little synopsis of what we can expect from it?
Yes, I can. So there's an open access paper out there which you can look at,
which is a psychometric study with meditators. It's in public library of science and it's called
the MPE92M study. You'll find it. My co-author's name is Alex Gamma. So over the last three years,
I've tried to develop a completely different approach to consciousness. There is a kind of
explanation most people don't know about. It's called a minimal model explanation.
And it means that you subtract everything from your target phenomenon that is superfluous
and not necessary for the causal emergence of the phenomenon. So I've asked myself,
so what is the simplest form of conscious experience human beings have? What can you
subtract? You can subtract color, vision, and you can subtract conscious thought.
And I have a candidate now. The candidate, it's completely hypothetical, is the experience of
pure awareness and meditation. For the simplest state of conscious experience, you must know I'm
also a long-term practitioner. I've meditated twice a day for more than 46 years and done a lot in my
private life about which I've never talked so far. Now, after we've done that first psychometric
study, there's a much bigger one coming now. We're also non-meditators. Can describe if... Let me
just ask you right now. If you look at all the conscious experience, you have the colors, the
sounds, my voice, your interceptive sensations. Can you attend to the quality of consciousness
as such? Honestly, I don't think so. Right. Okay. See, that is the question. And the idea is that
there's actually a phenomenal character to awareness as such, which is completely transparent to
almost every normal human being. You never feel it. But meditators could be a population that
cultivates this awareness of awareness, meta attention, attention to attention. Okay. So we
did the psychometric studies and we had some results and we had about 3,624 surveys of which
we could use 1,403. And then we said, if you don't have to do this, but if you want to describe in
words, a paradigmatic experience you've had in which you experienced consciousness as such,
please give us a written description. And that led to 841 reports from 57 different countries
where people described what they think is that what you think is unknown to you. And of course,
there may be confabulating, there may be misinterpreting, they have their own philosophical ideas and so
on. But in that book, I've tried to make a step forward before going into any grandiose philosophical
theorizing about pure awareness or demanding research programs before one knows what we're
talking about. I've just made an attempt to take the phenomenology very seriously.
And I've presented excerpts from about 500 reports by meditators how they describe the pure
awareness experience. And it's for a wider audience. So every chapter has a first part where you can
just read the descriptions. And then there are some ideas from neuroscience or philosophy.
And then you find common denominators. Very simple. So I have it here. So the first chapter is just
called relaxation. That's trivial. For most people, there is a phenomenology of being deeply relaxed.
The second most frequent thing is people describe it as peace. No thoughts absent of mental conflict.
Then you have silence. Mental silence. Then you have wakefulness. There's some people describe a
distinct phenomenology of being awake. And now let me ask you a question. Has it ever happened to you?
Sometimes one wakes up maybe two or three times in a year, a little too early even,
and one has had a particularly good night's sleep, a particularly good rest.
Yeah, that actually happened last night. Yeah, you had? Yeah. Now, if you don't make the mistake,
imagine you haven't made the mistake to look into your phone or connect to the internet.
And you haven't made a mistake to talk to anybody. You just got up a little early,
super fresh, and maybe with your first cup of tea or coffee, you just sat out on the terrace,
on the balcony, and just sat there. And you were just wide awake and super nervous,
nothing dramatic. You listen to the birds, you sip your tea. There was maybe a time where there was
a gap between two thoughts, maybe a two second gap. That is it. It's so simple. Every human
being knows it that you overlook it. Yes, I can say fancy things about it. For instance, I can also
say the phenomenal character of tonic alertness. And if one describe it, it has interesting other
phenomenological characteristics, for instance, density or soundness. And then you get
into deeper aspects of it, like non-vulow awareness, absence of itself, it can take different forms.
But I think one possibility is, and by the way, I'm not going to go into this book, so you have
500 reports, and I'm trying to offer the community a careful phenomenological description of pure
awareness. I'm creating appetizers, and people shall cook their own main courses. That's the idea,
right? I'm just preparing for a minimal model explanation of consciousness.
But there are interesting things in there. For instance, I would say, in Carl Friston's term,
what everybody has overlooked is that the strongest source of perturbation, that's my theory, the
strongest external stimulus that has to be explained away is not something that comes in
through sensory modules or through interception in the thalamus, but is the activity of the
Formatio Reticularis, the ascending activation system in the brainstem. That is actually
biophysically the most massive, completely unexplained signal source within the body.
And this happens when you wake up in the morning, and what we need to control our own level of
tonic alertness, so my highly speculative theory goes, is a predictive model of the level of
cortical arousal, the level of tonic alertness, different aspects to that, that allows the organism
to control its own long-term wakefulness. And I think that might be the simplest form of
conscious experience shared by all human beings. And if you listen to that, I found that in Mark
Song's latest book. Yes, The Hidden Spring. It's exactly what I was thinking about. Yeah.
There's this tradition, there's this tradition, the Amazio, Pankse, Mark Song's, where they have
more of the idea that this is actually a homostatic auto-regulation, or it's that
I've said that, I've said that in being no one, that it is elementary bioregulation,
that you, so to speak, you feel the sheer fact of aliveness itself, the organism
trying to stabilize itself homostatically. I think there's one step below this.
My thinking is very parallel in that respect to Mark Song's. There is this very low,
this very fundamental subcortical signal source, which I think has to be predictively
modeled by the brain. And that creates the experience of wakefulness. But I think
in my terminology, it's not aliveness, but sheer epistemic openness, as I call it. It is,
as neuroscientists would say, stimulus readiness, the experience of stimulus readiness,
the availability of executive control without having to exert it. And I think there's an
overlooked, very subtle, very simple phenomenology of just being awake and aware. And
I think that could lead to a minimal model explanation of consciousness, because
that is what I'm very much interested in research right now. There are rare advanced
practitioners of meditation who report about something that is sometimes called clear light
sleep or witnessing sleep, an experience of being awake during non REM sleep. No dreams,
no content, don't feel the body don't hear the environment in the bedroom. If that could be
proven, it's not proven. But if that could be empirically shown that this phenomenon exists,
pure wakefulness in a completely paralyzed body in the non REM state. I think that would be
a major pro progress in the consciousness community, because then we have subtracted all
perceptual content, we have subtracted the self, we have subtracted the first person perspective.
But we have some phenomenal experience, this embodied even, although it is of course neurologically
speaking, you experience a part of your brain, which is of course then politically incorrect
and all the meditators don't like it, because it interferes with their mortality denial.
So this gives you an idea where I go, I think we should try to aim at a minimal model explanation
and actually say, what is that which cannot be subtracted from conscious experience?
And I think it is the silent clarity involved in wakefulness somehow. And that's the elephant,
and there are many blind who touch it from very, very many different directions over the centuries.
So that's a bit where I'm going, of course, I have more to say.
You can't spell all the beans yet. We'll have to wait to read it. No, Thomas, I'm super eager to
read this book. I've got two of your books on my bookshelf, Being No One, Ego, Tunnel Life,
Sitting Up There. I've actually got them very close to Dennett's books.
It's like I've seen my books in a certain way. And I sort of put certain things because we've
had similar views, maybe not the same, but I tend to put them in similar places.
No, I think I've learned a lot of things. It's very fashionable to criticize Dennett. I still
know when I was a PhD student, I was allowed to peep in at the big guys at the Center for
Interdisciplinary Research in Bielefeld, Germany. And there were all these heroes, you know,
Jake Won Kim, and Robert Fangulik. And I met Dennett in a swimming pool, I still remember.
You know, many people have this and that criticism, one never knows what he really says,
and what is actually is the thesis, and what is the argument. But I think
what we all underestimate is how much we have learned from him, from his books.
You know, how important consciousness explained was in 1991 for many people, people forget that.
But he has been a real trailblazer, and I think a lot of people have learned a lot from him.
Yeah, I think that's a perfect note, because something I often ask my guests as we conclude is
if you had to think of around your perfect, what's it called, your perfect dinner,
good guests, or your Mount Rushmore, a favorite scientist slash philosophers,
who would those people be? You're like a top four. If you had to really think
best philosophers in history, or greatest or most influential to you at least.
Well, of course, in the modern debate of the mind-body problem,
since, say, all in tea place, after Gilbert Ryle, the concept of mind, people who stand out
to me are Hilary Putnam and Jaguar Kim. I've greatly profited from them.
But actually much more interesting is the completely unknown young people.
There are brilliant young people who are not going to name, because they will be embarrassed,
and probably would find a dinner with me boring, and had to be polite. But there are, you know,
there are what fascinates me. On a planet with eight billion people, there are some people
where everything went right. They have been smart. They had a normal, you know,
childhood experience with parents. They were in a rich country. They could go to a good university.
For some people, it works out. They found mentors. And there's a breathtaking new generation in the
consciousness community. You will only know their names in 15 to 20 years, but the standard
has really risen since my time. And if I look at this, they know math. English is like a second
language for them. They swim in the internet like fish, you know, and they will take this thing further.
And I'm not criticizing you, but I always find it stupid how journalists or television people
only want their prominent old people, you know, while there are so many good people in their
end 20s around, which breathtaking ideas, but it will take 15 years until anybody takes notice.
So I would probably prefer if I could just quietly sit with these
young people who impress me by having a meditation practice, smoking five methoxy DMT,
and being good academically at the same time. There are some. And
sounds like my friends that I had made school.
Oh, yeah, right. How did that turn out?
Very so. Some people did a lot of crazy stuff. Some people quit smoking completely. Some people
stopped drinking completely. Life changing things. Some people stopped drinking, some failed.
So what I really appreciate is people who do their homework academically.
But for whom this is also something existential, not just careerism and who in their own life do
something, you know, to explore this. I've been this guy for all my life to explore this from
different angles and not just by reading books. And, you know, consciousness is not like any other
theoretical problem. In the end, it has something to do with your own life. And you can't just
be a nerd. It doesn't work.
Yeah, exactly. Now, I think I completely agree with you. I think it takes,
that exploration has to be part of it. You can't just sit idly and read books the whole time. You
have to actually engage with this. And it's the mind body problem is often say it's something
that's difficult both intellectually and practically. You have to sort of engage with this
within both spheres. And I think you do that wonderfully.
I think that is also what this idea of a bewilderment school tour
alludes to there's a risk. I've seen this in training young people. You can be
in the top two percent and be a little bit on the autistic spectrum
and study perfectly well, write a PhD thesis, be superb, and then have no good ideas at 32.
Just have no good ideas. Because you were only always good at passing all tests and knowing
everything. And this also has to do something with the, you know, the educational idea or idea
what academia is in an ideal world. It should be possible to also live an examined life and
experiment with your own mind and your own consciousness. But I see the chances I don't
know about South Africa, but they're becoming slimmer and slimmer, because everything is so
competitive. And there's this fierce competition and scarce resources. And it breeds a certain
kind of researcher personality. And that may be very effective in some fields.
But somehow, I think in consciousness research, we need people with a wider perspective somehow.
Yes, you can't have that one, you can't have those students who are purely committed to
trying to grow their career. Whereas they're not really trying to actively engage with the topic
in that it incorporates meditation, for example, I mean, not many of them are going to actively do
the day to day meditation, if they know that they could just read one more book and pass the exam.
Yeah, it's in the time I have, you know, I've taught in eight German universities until I retired.
They are under stress. When I studied philosophy, it was a much more interesting time. I mean,
I also had time to go to demonstrations and have myself beaten up by cops and go to India.
They don't have this time anymore. They are nervous about their CV. And they have these
modular, I don't know if you have this in South Africa, this fully modularized BAMA system.
Where they really have to plan how they study and what examinations are coming up.
They can't waste a year on get falling in love with nature or some strange
philosopher and nothing comes of it, you know. Yeah, especially with an overpopulation crisis,
I mean, it's pretty much do or die at this point. It's either you get up and do it or you're just
going to fall behind. So it gets quite competitive. Yes. And somehow, we need protected spaces,
which are not an excuse for just hanging around and doing nothing. There's something really
a problem to be resolved there. Of course, because we know the other extreme, of course, exists too.
Yeah, exactly. It's always about finding that perfect balance. I mean, you're looking for that
perfect amount of book smart and street smart at the same time, just bringing them together.
Isn't it true, I mean, to study leave alone psychiatry, but to study psychiatry,
to study medicine is a very demanding path. It is, right? But he doesn't leave much space.
How did you do that? That you could still read philosophy books? How could you do that?
I mean, it was very difficult. But I think it was, I think when you question things
philosophically, there was a period in med school where I went through its deeply, deeply
depressed mood for a long while. But it was during that time where, I mean, as you brought up earlier,
I read a lot more philosophy journals. I mean, I read so many more philosophical books.
And I mean, it was tough. You often feel guilty because you have to read the textbooks. You have
to constantly study all the time. I just made a plan because I felt like this is just too intriguing
to not do. You reach that one point where you just got to sacrifice something else,
perhaps maybe not go out with your friends once in a while and read a philosophy book every now
and then or go out with your friends as well and get some sort of a philosophical view out of that
experience as well. So you're a bad doctor now, a bad but philosophically informed doctor.
Oh, hopefully not. I'll let my patience decide that. Now, I think it's, it's all about finding
that balance. And I think I did that. Well, I often used music as that, as that guide to
sort of that meditative practice for me, I think is music and like playing an instrument. I think,
yeah, so I think that's, and yeah, meditating as well. It's something that deeply enjoy.
I mean, another area that is very relevant. We haven't talked about is in philosophy is applied
ethics. I once founded a research unit for ethics of neuro technology, like new interventions in
the brain becoming better. And of course, in medical practice, you are really confronted
with ethical issues. I mean, I once had to go, I had a very sad time in my life, and I had to go
to a bone marrow transplant ward and see 40 people die and not a single person survive there of
leukemia. And afterwards, I always said as a philosopher, the patients have me to be protected
from the interests of the medical industry. And after I had seen the fantastic job, these gay,
intensive care nurses do at quarter to three at night, get paid a really bad salary for it.
I thought two things. I thought, no, it's all wrong from what I really saw at bedside,
the patient has to be protected from their relatives and the emotional needs of their
relatives in that dying process. And second, all the lazy people in my philosophy department
should be fired. And these people should be paid a better salary, you know, these intensive care
nurses. I drastically changed my views from seeing what is really happening on on such a ward. And
of course, they confront these issues. Never. I mean, about say, how do you call this assisted
suicide, I think is that I mean, they have to make these decisions. And nobody ever technically
discusses the they would use little philosophy seminars. And of course, many of the solutions
they find are even illegal, they have to do them undercover at their own risk. They have to deal
with angry relatives. I've seen the situations where the patient is ready to die. And the doctor
is ready. Everything's clear. But the relatives aren't. You know, and speaking of alleviation of
suffering, it would be good, I think, if there were specialized applied ethic courses for intensive
care nurses and doctors, so that they can think about these things in a more structured way.
When people ask them for help, and people ask for help, and then they basically try to do the
right thing. I don't know if that appears in your practice. And in South Africa, it's very much the
same. I think the amount of philosophy that doctors are told, or even I mean, I think patients in
general, that's why I think once I've heard you say that you think it should be important that
in schools, they have certain practices that are fundamental to us growing into sort of,
I wouldn't say better adults, but I mean, certain things like being taught about meditative
practices, being taught more philosophical ideas at a young age. I mean, this sort of grooms this
would this would in practice groom a relative from a young age to actually be supportive for
that person, the sort of human skills that we tend to lack or tend to focus on ourselves.
So I completely agree with you. I think that's a field that needs so much work.
Have you ever been exposed to medical ethics or applied ethics? Is this part of your study?
Yeah, we do. We don't do enough, I can tell you that. So they generally fall into very,
very superficial topics. They focus very much on principalism and certain ethical.
Yeah. So you get into those just beneficence, non-maleficent. And then you just get stuck into
that. And then you go into casuistry where you focus on just case-based ethics. Then we go into
everything else, utilitarianism and every other form of it. But it tends to majority of the focus
is on that principalism. And then as long as you're not doing harm, you're doing good,
it's kind of like you don't. And this is actually a way of defending yourself from
the messiness of real life situations, isn't it? In your practice, do you ever encounter
a situation where you think, oh, God, I would really like to be able to call somebody now,
a professional ethicist and ask for advice? Oh, yeah, a lot. Should it be something like
an information clearance house or something like that? No, definitely. So if you work in a hospital
in South Africa and if you have these ethical dilemmas yourself, you actually do, you call an
ethics board. There is one. Yeah, you get the team together and you actually have ethical
discussions regarding what is the best plan for the patient. So it is a fundamental feature of the
healthcare system in South Africa. The unfortunate reality of our South African healthcare system
is that it's overburdened, under-resourced, corrupt, and so there's just so many other factors.
So we never really get the chance to actively implement these in the best way they possibly
could. But for the most part, we do. Yeah. But yeah, Thomas, this has been a great conversation.
We've gone through so many different topics. Sorry about this. I think it's partly my fault.
I mean, I had a structure planned and then I just let it go. But it's been great. I mean,
I've enjoyed it so much. Anything from you, any final words, anything you want to say?
No, no. I thought this was a great experience. We've lost the red thread completely.
I hope it is good for some of you readers, some of you, some of your audience.
Definitely. I can tell you one thing. They will love the episode. If there's one thing I've
realized, the mind-body solution listeners, they come for the philosophy, for the applied ethics,
for everything we spoke about pretty much within the niche of this podcast. So
nothing swayed out of the podcast niche. So I'm happy with this conversation. Even though
it's called mind-body solution, it doesn't mean we focus solely on the mind-body problem.
It's an exploration of morality, ethics, mental health, all of it. So it fits perfectly.
Maybe just point to one general problem I see that will also occur, for instance,
in medical practice. I think in the consciousness community, of course, there is
a lot of discussion and they're competing in models, but we are getting somewhere.
A lot has happened since 1994 and there is progress. And of course, many people would
disagree, but there is a general picture appearing on the horizon. And one thing I'm
quite concerned about is that 80% of humankind on this planet still live firmly in religious
images of what a human being is in a religious worldview and are also quite immune to rational
criticism. And they will not like what science and philosophy eventually tell them about
computational structures, consciousness, evolution, the nature of the self. They will
not like it. I think the general world public is not ready. And there are other things coming
to them, the climate catastrophe, AI, and so forth. And what I have called the naturalist turn
in the image of humankind, in the image of man, large parts of the population are not ready for
this. And this also includes you as a philosophically informed doctor may work under an image of man
that many of your patients do not share. And a big problem is how one can still firmly defend
science, a rational evidence-based approach, but keep respecting each other, respecting
each other's vulnerabilities, belief systems, solutions people have found for themselves in
their own life. That's a major task, you know, to stand the ground of science and rational philosophy.
But still respecting all those others on the planet who are completely somewhere else
with their belief systems. And maybe we should also give some thoughts to that.
I think that's a beautiful thought to leave the listeners with. I think that's something that
we're all thinking, everybody's trying to figure out how to balance that fine line.
And I think you said it perfectly. Thank you, Thomas. Thank you so much.
Thank you for the invitation.
It's been an absolute pleasure. I hope one day we can have a round two.
Perhaps in our round two, I will set a nice structure plan.
Okay, okay, okay.
But I enjoy this immensely. This was wonderful. Thank you so much. And I've been looking forward
to chatting to you for such a long time. Your work has deeply impacted my own work.
And I thank you for all your contributions to the field.
Yeah, and for being such a fill, thank you for being such a philosophically informed,
you know, as medical doctors, we need, we can't have more enough of people like you.
One detail you might want to mention, I don't know it, but that book we have been talking about,
talking about will go in the brand new direct to open program of the MIT press.
That means it is freely available to every of your listen, everyone.
It could be end of October. I don't know when they get the act together,
but you don't have to pay for it. You can just download it.
Oh, fantastic. Once the book's out, I'll definitely be putting a link to it
in the description. So as soon as the book's out, I'll have a link ready for you.
Okay, good.
Thank you so much, Manu. I really appreciate it, Thomas.
Thank you and have a great evening.
Yeah, have a great weekend. Bye-bye.